---
layout: post
title: This week I learned 12 — late post
categories: [TIL]
---
Disclaimer: I'm still pretty new to rust, so there's a non-zero chance some of the
information below is incorrect. If you see anything wrong please let me know.

In Rust there are two ways to use polymorphism:
1. Statically
2. Dynamically

Static polymorphism is achieved with generic functions. Consider a function
that prints the contents of a file line by line. The standard library provides
a `File` struct that can be used to construct a `BufReader`.

```rust
let file = File::open("foo").unwrap();
let mut buf_reader = BufReader::new(file);
```

`BufReader` implements `BufRead` that affords printing lines from a file. A function to
print lines using a `BufReader` might look like this:
```rust
fn print_lines(b: &mut BufReader<File>) {
    let mut buffer = String::with_capacity(1024);
    while let Ok(s) = b.read_line(&mut buffer) {
        if s == 0 {
            return;
        }

        print!("{}", buffer);
        buffer.clear();
    }
}
```

This works fine to print lines for a `BufReader`, however, it doesn't work for reading
lines from `stdin`. While the function looks exactly the same for reading lines from
`stdin`, we'd have to write an entirely seperate function to do so. This is  where
polymorphism comes in.

Since `BufReader` and `StdinLock` both implement `BufRead`, we can rewrite `print_lines`
to take a generic `T` that implements `BufRead`.
```rust
fn print_lines<T: BufRead>(b: &mut T) {
    let mut buffer = String::with_capacity(1024);
    while let Ok(s) = b.read_line(&mut buffer) {
        if s == 0 {
            return;
        }

        print!("{}", buffer);
        buffer.clear();
    }
}
```

This accomplishes our goal of printing from a file (`BufReader`) or `stdin`(`StdinLock`).
An important note is that this decision happens *statically*. That is, the compiler
stamps out the correct `print_lines` when `rustc` compiles our code.

The alternative to this approach is dynamic polymorphism (similar to C++'s virtual
methods).

Implementing `print_lines` with dynamic polymorphism looks like this:
```rust
fn print_lines(b: &mut dyn BufRead) {
    let mut buffer = String::with_capacity(1024);
    while let Ok(s) = b.read_line(&mut buffer) {
        if s == 0 {
            return;
        }

        print!("{}", buffer);
        buffer.clear();
    }
}
```

Not much changed. Although now our program only has one `print_lines` for both
`StdinLock` and `BufReader`. This is dispatched *dynamically* at runtime (again *similar*
to a virtual method call in C++).
